THE PLAN OF OLD LOS ANGELES: AND THE STORY OF ITS HIGHWAYS AND BYWAYS
Author(s): J. M. GUINN
Source: Annual Publication of the Historical Society of Southern California, Los Angeles,
1895, Vol. 3, No. 3 (1895), pp. 40-50
Published by: Historical Society of Southern California
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41167619
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
.facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms




            Historical Society of Southern California is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
            to Annual Publication of the Historical Society of Southern California, Los Angeles




                                                      This content downloaded from
                                    128.200.138.39 on Thu, 17 Sep 2026 20:44:04 UTC
                                              All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
           THE PLAN OF OLD LOS ANGELES
                AND THE STORY OF ITS HIGHWAYS AND BYWAYS.



                                      BY   J.   M. GUINN.




                               [Read December 2, 1895.]
     The history of the founding of our American cities shows that the loca-
tion of a city, as well as its plan, is as often the result of accident as of de-
sign.     Neither   chance nor accident              entered     into the selection of the
site, the plan, or the name of Los Angeles. All these had been determined
upon years before a colonist had been enlisted to make the settlement. The
Spanish colonist, unlike the American backwoodsman, was not free to locate
on the public domain wherever his caprice or his convenience dictated.
        The Spanish poblador (founder or colonist,) went where he was sent.
He built his pueblo after a plan designated by royal reglamento and decreed
by the laws of the Indies. His planting and his sowing, the size of his fields
and the shape of his house lot, were fixed by royal decree. He was a fief,
a dependent of the crown. The land he lived on was not his own, except to
use. If he failed to cultivate it,it was taken from him and he was deported
from the colony.

     The pueblo plan of colonization did not originate with the Spanish-
American colonists. It was older even than Spain herself. In early Europ-
ean colonization, the pueblo plan - the common square in the center of the
town, the house lots grouped around it,the arable fields and the common
pasture lands beyond, appears in the Aryan village, in the ancient German
mark, and in the old Roman praesidium. The Puritans adopted this form in
their firstsettlements in New England. Around the public square or com-
mon, where stood the meeting house and the town house, they laid off their
home lots, and beyond these were their cultivated fields and their common
 pasture lands. This form of colonization was a combination of communal
interests and individual ownership. Primarily, no doubt, it was adopted for
 protection against the hostile natives, and secondly, for social advantage. It
reversed the order of our own western colonization.      The town came first, it
 was the initial point from which the settlement radiated ; while with our own
wes tern pioneers the town was an afterthought - a center point for the con-
 venience of trade.




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.200.138.39 on Thu, 17 Sep 2026 20:44:04 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             THE PLAN OF OLD LOS ANGELAS.                                     4I
     The plaza is a an essential feature in the plan of all Spanish- American
towns. It is usually the geographical center of the pueblo lands. The old
plaza of El Pueblo de Nuestra Sonora, La Reina de Los Angeles (the town of
our Lady, the Queen of the Angels) as decreed by Gov. Felipe de Neve in his
"Instruccion para La Fundaccion de Los Angeles," was a parallelogram one
hundred varas in length by seventy-five in breadth. It was laid out with its
corners facing the four winds or cardinal points of the compass, and with its
streets running at right angles to each of its four sides, so that no street
would be swept by the wind· Two streets, each ten varas wide, opened out
on the longer sides, and three on each of the shorter sides. Upon three sides
of the plaza were the house lots 20x40 varas each, fronting on the square.
One half of the remaining side was reserved for public buildings - a guard
house, a town house, and a public granary ; the other half was an open space.
Around three sides of the old plaza clustered the mud-daubed huts of the pio-
neers of Los Angeles, and around the embryo town, a few years later, was
built an adobe wall - not so much perhaps for protection from foreign invas-
ion as from domestic intrusion. It was easier to wall in the town than to
fence in the cattle and the goats that pastured on the ejidos or commons, out-
side the walls.
      The area of a pueblo, under Spanish rule, was four square leagues of
land, or about 17,770 acres, (a Spanish league contains 4444 acres.) The
pueblo lands were divided into solares or house lots, suertes or planting
                                                              -
fields, dehesas or outside pasture lands, ejidos or commons lands nearest
the town where the mustangs were tethered and the goats roamed at their
                   -
pleasure ; propios lands rented or leased from whicti a revenue was raised
to pay municipal expenses ; realengas - royal lands, also used for raising reve-
nue for the town government
     In 1786, five years after the founding of the Pueblo of our Lady of the
Angels, Alferez Jose Arguello, aided by corporal Vicente and private Roque,
put the nine settlers who had been faithful to their trust, in possession of their
house lots and planting fields. Three of the pobladores originally recruited
to found the pueblo had been deported for general worthlessness.
     Lieut. Arguello spent but little time over surveys and probably set up no
land-marks to define boundaries. The próprios were said to extend southerly
2,200 varas from the dam (which was located near the point where the Buena
Vista street bridge now crosses the river) to the limit of the distributed lands.
The realengas were located on the eastern side of the river.
     The boundaries of the Plaza viejo or old plaza, as nearly as it is possible
to locate them now, are as follows: The southeast corner of the plaza would
coincide with what is now the northeast corner of Marchessault and Upper
Main streets.    From the said northeast corner of these streets draw a line




                               This content downloaded from
             128.200.138.39 on Thu, 17 Sep 2026 20:44:04 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Jß HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

northwest one hundred varas (2 78 feet) - this line would constitute the east
erly line of the old plaza.   On this line construct a parallelogram with its
opposite   or westerly side one hundred varas in length, and its northerly and
southerly sides seventy-five varas each. These boundaries will locate, ap-
proximately, as near as it is possible now to locate the plaza real or royal
square of the old Pueblo of our Lady of the Angels.
      At the founding of the pueblo, September 4, 1781, the plaza was dedi-
cated with solemn ceremonies. A mass was said by a priest from the Mission
San Gabriel aided by the choristers and musicians of that mission. There
were salvos of musketry, a procession with a cross, candlesticks, etc. The
standard of Spain, with the image of our Lady the Queen of the Angels, (the
latter carried by the women) was borne at the head of the procession.    This
procession made a circuit of the plaza, the priest blessing the plaza and the
building lots, and it is said that Governor Neve made a speech, the first ever
made within the limits of Los Angeles. I have been unable to find any satis-
factory reason assigned for the abandonment of the old plaza. The probable
cause of the change was the location of the Church of our Lady of the
Angels on its present site. The first   church or chapel was a small building,
25x30   feet, begun in  1784,  and completed in 1789. It fronted on the plaza.
The new church was begun in 1814. By order of Governor Sola, in 1818,
the site was changed to higher ground - its present location. The building
 was completed in 1822 - forty-one years after the founding of the Pueblo.
The open space in front of the church was part of the ejidos or commons, and
was used for a place to picket mustangs while the owners were attending
church. In course of time it became recognized as the plaza or public square.
     Neve's streets that were to be free from the sweep of the winds, have dis-
appeared. There are no land mark« to show the location of the twelve house
lots that clustered around the old plaza. Nor can we locate the boundaries
of any one of the twenty-seven suertes or sowing fields that were laid offon
the alluvial lands below the plaza. Time, flood, and the hated gringos have
long since obliterated all ancient landmarks and boundary lines of the old
Pueblo as effectually as did Neve's pobladores all traces of the Indian town,
Yangna, that once stood on the site chosen for thé Pueblo of our lady of the
Angels.
       As the town grew, it straggled offfrom its nucleus - the old plaza in an
                       -
irregular tort of a way without definite plot or plan. When a house was
to be built the builder selected a site most convenient to his material - adobe.
If his house did not conform to the lines of the street, the street must adjust
itself to the house. Fifty years after the founding of the Pueblo there was
not a regular laid offstreet within its limits. Indeed there was but little neces-
 sity for streets. There were no wheeled vehicles, save a few old screaking




                              This content downloaded from
            128.200.138.39 on Thu, 17 Sep 2026 20:44:04 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             THE P LA Ж OF OLD LOS ANGELES.                                   43
carretas, used for hauling brea or asphaltum - the roofing material of the
adobe houses.    The caballero on his wiry and s лге footed mustang, threaded
his way among the scattered and irregularly built houses, and it mattered
little to him whether the path zigzagged or ran in straight lines. Walking was
a lost art to the native Califorman. He was a centaur - half horse and half
man - and only half a man, without his horse. As he never walked when he
could ride, sidewalks he did not need.
      With the growth of the town southward, the business center drifted from
its first locality on Upper Main street, and for a time became fixed at the
head of Los Angeles street where that street intersected with Aliso, Arcadia,
Sanchez and Negro alley.     At that point Los Angeles was then a very broad
street probably two hundred feet wide; it narrowed as it ran southward and
widened again at its intersection with First street. In the early part of the
century it was known as Zanjo, (ditch) street. In the early thirties it had been
dignified into the Calle Principal or Main street and with its continuation
the Calle de Los Huertos - the street of orchards - (now San Pedro) formed
the principal highway running southward from the center of the Pueblo; later
on it was known as Vineyard street.*  First street at its intersection with
Los Angeles and San Pedro  was known as Broad street or Broadway - A mis.
nomer now but appropriate enough in the days of cheap lands.
     Under Spanish rule the absolute title of all the lands in California was
vested in the King. The individual occupant held only a usufructuary title.
It was his to use so long as he used it for the purpose for which it was given
him. Possession then was ten parts of the law. The occupant could hold on
but he could not let go of it. To cease to use his land was to lose it. He
could not sell it, he could not even indulge in that privilege so dear to the
American land owner, he could not mortgage it. The land passed from
father to son by the law of primogeniture.
      When California became a part of the Mexican Republic the title to
pueblo lands became vested in the ayuntamiento or town council. When the
Pueblo of Los Angeles became a city in 1835, there was not a land owner in it
who had a written title to his lands. Under Spanish rule the military commisi-
onados, and under Mexican, the ayuntamiento made verbal grants. In 1836
owners was ordered to apply for written titles but little heed was given to the
Order. Efforts were made from time to time to induce the occupants of town
lots to perfect their titles. But the easy going methods of the pobladores had
been transmitted to their descendants. Land was cheap and plentiful. There
was no inducement to land grabbing, consequently disputes over titles and


    Note. - For information in regard to the old names of streets I am indebted ta
С. С. Grove of the West Coast Abstract company, I4O8 Angeles.




                              This content downloaded from
            128.200.138.39 on Thu, 17 Sep 2026 20:44:04 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
44 HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.
 land boundaries were of rare occurrence and title deeds when given were
loosely drawn. The more or Jessin a conveyance never worried the party
of the second part.   In the minutes of the ayuntamiento may be found the
grant of a certain piece of land now known as the Requena tract which is
 described and deeded as that lot or tract on which the "Cows ate the apples/
        On the 23rd of May 1835, Los Angeles ceased to be a Pueblo*                    The
following is a translation of the copy of the decree erecting it into a city:
      His excellency, the president ad interim of the United States of Mexico
Miguel Barraganr The president ad interim of the United Scates of Mexico
 to the inhabitants of the Republic let it be known: That the general congress
 has decreed the following: That the town of Los Angeles, Upper California,
is erected to a city, and shall be for the future the capital of that territory.
      Basilo Arrillaga,                    Antonio Pacheco Leal,
             President House of Deputies.           President of the Senate.
      Demetrio    Del   Castillo,          Manuel    Miranda,
             Secretary House of Deputies.           Secretary of the Senate.
        I, therefore, order it to be printed and circulated and duly complied,
with.      Palace of the Federal Government in Mexico, May 23, 1835.
                                                                    Miguel Barragan.
         Although the Mexican Congress by decree had erected Los Angeles to a
city yet to the Calitornians it was still the Pueblo.   Even now alter sixty years
 of city life, t<>the old time native Californian it is still the "Pueblo." The
decree made it a city but it was ten years after, before it became the capital.
The citizens failed to provide suitable buildings and the denizens of Monterey
clung to the archives. The "Ciudad de Los Angeles" was a city of magnifi-
cent distances when it firsttook on metropolitan airs. The Departmental
Assembly of 1834 designated the boundaries of the Pueblo of Los Angeles to
be "two leagues to each wind from the center of the Plaza.77 This gave the
Pueblo, when it was "erected into a city," an area of sixteen square leagues
or over one hundred square miles. There was no survey of boundary lines,
and the city fathers worried along ten years without knowing exactly where
the city ended and the country began. In 1846, an attempt was made to fix
the boundaries but all that was done was to measure two leagues "in the direc-
tion of the four winds from the Plaza church" and set stakes as boundary
lines.     Then came the American invaders.
     At the time of the American occupation (1846), the city had skirted
along the foothills as far down as First (or Primero) street with possibly a
few scattering houses below that point.
     The discovery of gold and the rush of immigration to the mines aroused
the sleepy old "ciudad" of Los Angeles from its bucolic dreams. A stream
of immigration, by the southern route, poured through its streets and gold




                                 This content downloaded from
               128.200.138.39 on Thu, 17 Sep 2026 20:44:04 UTC
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
             THE FLAK OF OLD LOS ANGELES.                                     40
flowed into its coffers from the sale of the cattle that covered the plains be-
yond.   With increasing prosperity the city became ambitious to make a bet-
ter appearance.     The ayuntamiento decided to have a portion of the mesa
lying to the south of Calle Primero and west of Calle Principal surveyed and
subdivided into city lots and sold to procure a fund to make some needed
improvements.

     In the city clerk's office is a copy of a map of the first subdivision of Los
Angeles city lands made after the American occupation. It is entitled,
"Plan de la Ciudad de Los Angeles, by E. O. C. Ord, Lt. U. S. Α., Wm. R.
Hutton, Asst., August 29, 1849." Ord's survey embraces all that portion of
the city bounded north by First street and the base of the first line of hills,
east by Main street, south by Twelfth street and west by Pearl street.        Also
that portion of the city north of Short street and west of Upper Main to the
base of the hills. On the "plan" the lands between Main street and the river
are designated as "plough grounds, gardens, corn and vine lands." The
streets in the older portion of the city are marked but not named. The blocks,,
except the first tier, are 600 feet in length, and are divided into ten lots each.
120 feet front by 165 feet in depth.

      Ord took his compass course for the line of Main street S. 24 o 45 · W.
from the corner opposite Jose Antonio Carrillo's house which stood where the
Pico House now stands. This lot was granted Carrillo by the Comission-
ado in 1 821 and is one of the earliest transfers of which there is any record
On Orďs map, Main, Spring and Fort (Broadway) streets ran in parallel
straight lines to Twelfth street.   How Main street came to zigzag below
Sixth street, Spring to disappear at Ninth street, and Fort to ignominiously
end in Governor Downey's orange orchard, (subdivided in 1884), are things
that as Lord Dundreary says, "No fellow can find out." Ord probably made
an accurate survey but many of the blocks now are irregular, some contain
an excess and others are short and some of the streets have drifted away
from their original locations.  This, in part, is due to the easy going meth-
ods of those early days. The ayuntamiento was to have placed permanent
monuments to mark the corners of blocks, but neglected to do so. The
corner stakes were convenient for picketing mustangs and were rapidly disap-
pearing. The Council, a year or so after the survey was made, gave Juan
Temple a contract to place stone monuments to mark the corners. He hired
a gang of Mexicans to do the work. If they found a corner stake they placed
a monument; if not, some one of the pang paced off the length of the block
and set the corner stone. The excess in some blocks and the shortage in
others might be accounted for if we could find out whether it was a long-leg-
ged or a short-legged paisano that did the stepping.        The price oř Ord




                               This content downloaded from
             128.200.138.39 on Thu, 17 Sep 2026 20:44:04 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
46 HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

survey lots on Spring street in the fall of '49 and spring of '50          ranged from
$25 to $50 each.
      The names of the streets on Ord's plan are given in both Spanish and
 English ; beginning with Main they are as follows : Calle Principal - Main
                            -
 street; Calle Primavera Spring street, named for the season spring
 Calle Fortin - Fort street ; Calle Loma - Hill street ; Calle Accytuna - Olive
 street; Calle de Las Caridad - The Street of Charity (now Grand avenue).
Calle de Las Esperanzas - The Street of Hopes ; Calle de Los Flores - The
Street of Flowers ; Calle de Los Chapules - The Street of Grasshoppers (now
 Pearl street). North of the plaza church the north and south streets were
the Calle de Eternidad- Eternity street, so named because it had neither
beginning nor end, or, rather, each end terminated in the hills. Calle eel
Того -Bull street, significant of the national pastime of Spain and Mexico-
the bull fight. Calle de Las Arispas - Hornet street; an exceedingly lively-
street at times when the hornets had business engagements with the
paisanos. Calle de Las Adobes - Adobe street, well named. The east
and     west   streets  were    Calle Corta - Short street ; Calle Alta -
                                      -
High street ; Calle de Las Virgines Street of Virgins ; Calle del Colégio
- College street, the only        street that retains its primitive name.

    The Calle de Las Chapules was for many years the extreme western
street .of the city.   The name originated thus: On certain years, mostly
during   the dry  or drouth years, myriads of grasshoppers hatched on the
low grassy plains of the Ballona and Cienegas.         When they had de-
voured  all vegetation where they originated, they took flight, and, flying
with the wind, moved in great clouds towards the east - like the locusts
of Egypt, devouring everything in their course.     When the destroying
hosts reached the Calle de Las Chapules, the vinatero knew his grape
crop forthat season was doomed. The voracious hopper would not leave a
green leaf on his vines, and the vineyardist considered himself fortunate if
the destroying host did not devour the bark as well as the leaves.

     Calle Primavera - Spring street, sixty or seventy years ago was known
as the Calle de Las Caridad - the Street of Charity. The aristocratic part
of the   city inthose days was in the neighborhood of the plaza, and on
Upper Main street.     Spring street being well out in the suburbs, its in-
habitants were mostly peons and Mexicans of the poorer class, who were de-
pendent largely upon the charity of their wealthier neighbors. There is a
tradition, which I have not been able to verify by written record, that back
about the beginning of the century, Spring street was known as Calle Cui-
dado - Lookout or Beware street, so-called because of the numerous washes
and gulches cutting across it from the low foothills. The name would be




                                This content downloaded from
              128.200.138.39 on Thu, 17 Sep 2026 20:44:04 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 THE PLAN OF OLD LOS ANGELES.                                  47
appropriate now, but it would be for other reasons.
    Main street below the junction, about that time was known as Calle de
Las Allegria - Junction street. The question is often asked why was Spring
swung off on a diagonal to form a junction with Main? The historical
 facts of the case are that Main street forms a junction with Spring.     That
portion of Spring street between the junction and first,is the older street by
many years. It is part of an old road made more than a century ago.
It began at the old plaza and followed the present line of Main tetreet to the
junction. In Ord's "plan," this old road is traced from the junction
north-westward.       It follows the present line of Spring street          to
First street, then crosses blocks 2 and 4, diagonally, to the corner of Third
and Broadway. It intersects Hill at Fourth street and Olive at Fifth street,
skirting the hills it passes out of the city near Ninth street to the brea
springs from which the colonists obtained the roofing material for their adobe
houses. This road or street was used formany years after the American oc-
cupation and was recognized as a street in conveyances         Within the past
three years the city council gave a quit-claim deed to a portion of this street
to a lot owner in Block 11J^ O. S.      It has been, by some poetical historio-
graphers, claimed  that this  road was  part of the Camino del Rey, (the King's

highway)  of the olden  times.   "The  King's horses and the King's men" may
have galloped over it bearing royal mandates from pueblo to presidio, but
creaking carretas, loaded with brea, were more common than the King's
caballeros on this "royal road." On a map of the pueblo of Los Angeles,
made in 1786, when Arguello surveyed the lands of the founders, there is a
road marked as beginning at the southeast corner of the old plaza, from
thence running southeasterly until it intersects what is now Aliso street;
thence following the present line of that street it crosses the river and passes
out of the pueblo to the southeast. There are traces of this road in the old
records. It leads southeastward through the Paso de Bartolo, thence to San
Juan Capistrano and San Luis Rey, to San Diego ; then down the coast of
Lower California to Loreto, near Cape San Lucas. This, in the days of
King Carlos III, was the Camino del Rey, or Camino real.            It was not like
"the road from Winchester town, good a         broad  highway leading down," but
rather a Camino    de  herradura  -  a   bridle  path. Wheeled vehicles seldom
traveled it.  Although   but  the  semblance    of a road, yet time and again has
this old highway    echoed  the   tread    of marching armies. In the troublous
          1
times of 83 1-3,  when  Echeandia     of the   south and Zamarano of the north
waged  a  bloodless warfare  against   each  other and fired offsesquipedalian pro
nunciamientos as ferocious in the rhetoric as they were harmless in effect,
down this old camino from Paso de Bartolo rode Echeandia's faithful ad-
herent, Captain Barroso, at the head of a thousand mounted Indians intent




                               This content downloaded from
             128.200.138.39 on Thu, 17 Sep 2026 20:44:04 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
48 HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.
on the capture of the recalcitrant Pueblo of Angeles, but at the intercession
of the beleaguered inhabitants, this modern Corilanus turned aside to regale
his neophyte retainers on the fat bullocks of the San Gabriel Mission. And
 via the Camino real from Los Nietos rode Juan Gallardo, the cobbler, in com-
mand of his fifty  Sonoran patriots, when, in imitation of the hidalgos of his
native land, he essayed to play at the national game of Mexico - revolution.
And by the same highway, he entered the pueblo in the small hours of th e
morning, and awoke its conscript fathers from their dreams of peace by the
drum beat of war.     And along the same Camino real, from Paso de Bartolo,
marched the saxon conqueror, Stockton, with his invading army. On this
roadway was fought the last battles of the conquest, when the boom of Stock-
ton's cannon sounded the death knell of Mexican domination in California.
      Going northward the Camino real, or main highway, crossed the river
near the base of the hills and followed up its valley to the Mission San Fer-
nando ; from there westerly to San Bunena ventura, then on to Santa Barbara
and the missions beyond, to Monterey. In the waning years of the last cen-
tury out from the capital, Monterey, on the first   day of each month, rode a
courier southward, gathering from each mission, pueblo and presidio its little
budget of mail as he made his monthly trip to Loreto on the Gulf- a perilous
ride of a thousand miles over the old Camino del Rey.
      There was one street in the older portion of Los Angeles that is not
named in Ord's plan, but which, in the flush days of gold mining from 1850
to '55, had a more wide-spread notoriety than any other street in the city.
It was the Calle de Los Negros in Spanish, but Americanized into Nigger
alley. It was a short and narrow street extending from tne then termination
of Los Angeles street to the plaza.    la length it did not exceed 500 feet.
Yet within its limited extent it enclosed more wickedness and crime than any
similar area on the face of the earth. Gambling dens, saloons, dance houses,
and disreputable dives lined either side. From morning to night, and from
night to morning, a motley throng of Americans, Mexicans, Indians and for-
eigners of nearly every nation and tongue crowded and jostled one another in
its dens and dives. They gambled, they drank, they quarreled, they fought,
and some ofthem died - not for their country - although the country was
benefitted by their death. In the early '50s there were more desperadoes, out-
laws and cut-tliroats in Los Angeles than in any other city on the coast. In
the year 1853 the violent deaths from fights and assassinations averaged over
one a day. The Calle de Los Negros was the central point towards which
the lawlessness of the city converged. It was, in its prime, the wickedest
street on earth. With the decadence of gold mining the character of the
street changed, but its morals were not improved by the change.      It ceased
to be the rendezvous of the gambler and the desperado and became the center
of the Chinese quarter of the city. Even in its decadence its murderous




                              This content downloaded from
            128.200.138.39 on Thu, 17 Sep 2026 20:44:04 UTC
                      All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 THE PLAN OF OLD LOS ANGELES.                                 49
character clung toit. On this street in 187 1 took place that terrible tragedy
known as the Chinese Massacre, when eighteen Chinamen and one white
man were murdered. The extension of Los Angeles street obliterated it from
the plan of the city.
      When the United States Land Commission, in 1851, began its herculean
 task of adjudicating the Mexican land grants in California, the city of Los
Angeles laid claim to sixteen square leagues of land. The Hancock survey
of 1853, had divided the city lands south of Pico street, to the Ranchos Los
Cuervos (Crow Rancho) and the Paso de La Tijera, and on the west to the
La Cienega, into 35 acre tracts known as city donation lots. The city limits
on the south, (west of the river) extended nearly three miles below the present
 boundary line of the city, and en the west nearly two miles,to the Cienega. All
the territory sought to be annexed to the city at the recent election was once
within the city limits. The streets, south of Pico, were named after the
presidents.    Beginning with Washington, in regular succession followed,
Adams, Jefferson, Madison, Monroe, John Quincy Adams and Jackson streets.
All these streets, except parts of the firstthree, have long since disappeared in
the orange groves of Vernon and the market gardens of University and Rose-
dale. The Mexican governors, after whom the north and south streets were
named, have been more fortunate than the presidents. We still have Echean-
dia, Figueroa, Alvarado and Micheltoreno streets, although considerably cur-
tailed as to length South of Boyle Heights and east of the river, the Ro. San
Antonio curbed the city's ambition to expand in that direction. On the
north and north-west the Ro. Los Feliz and the Verdugos encroached
on the city's area and the hostile owners refused to be surveyed into
the city.    On the east, from the center of the plaza it was two leagues to
the city line. The area of the city according to the Hancock (or Hansen)
                                                          -
survey of 1855, wasafraction less than 5o;square miles a magnificent city on
paper. The land commission       in 1856, confirmed to the city a grant of four
square leagues (about 28 square miles) and rejected its claim to all outside
ofthat. After many delays, in 1875, nearly twenty years later, a United
States patent was issued to the mayor and council - and then the greater Los
Angeles of the early 50's, shrank to the proportions of Felipe de Neve's
Pueblo of 178 1,-"one league to each wind measured from the center of the
plaza."
     It was not to be expected that Neve's ease loving pobladores would long
preserve in its entirety the musical but long drawn out name of the new born
town by the Rio Porciuncula, El Pueblo de Nuestra Sonora, la Reina de Los
Angeles, was inconveniently syllabic for every day use; in 1787 it had been
abbreviated and changed to Santa Maria de Los Angeles, later on to Santa
Maria. It was at one time proposed to change the name to Villa Victoria
la Reina de Los Angeles so that it might 11>tbe confounded with Puebla in




                               This content downloaded from
             128.200.138.39 on Thu, 17 Sep 2026 20:44:04 UTC
                       All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
50 HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.
old Mexico. In the tumultuous days of '39 when the seditious and turbulent
angelenos vexed the righteous soul of good old prefect, Cosme Pena, he was
wont to speak of it as the Pueblo de Los Diablos - the town of the devils.
In official documents, under Mexican rule, it was simply Angeles. It is to
be regretted that the Americans after the conquest did not continue the custom
and thus save posterity the necessity of speaking and writing the prefix "Los."
       In almost every "write up" of the early history of L03 Angeles appears
this venerable fiction "The founders of the town numbered twelve adult
males, all heads of families." "There were forty-six persons in all." "The men
were discharged soldiers from the Mission San Gabriel." This fiction has
not that merit of the old time novels, "founded on facts." It is all fiction.
There were not twelve founders - Rivera enlisted fourteen pobladores in
Sonora and Sinaloa, two deserted, one was left behind at Loreto * in Lower
California and then there were only eleven. There was not forty-six persons
 in all - only forty-four. Not a man of the eleven was a discharged soldier
from San Gabriel.      None of them had ever been at San Gabriel until they
arrived with Zuniga's expedition on the 18th of August preceding the found-
ing. Of the twenty-two adults, two were Spaniard^ nine were Indians and one
 mestizo (one was classed as a coyote- wild indián) and ten were negroes and
 mulattoes. Early in 1782, three of the founders, one of the Spaniards and two
 of the negroes were deported from the colony for general worthlessness and
their property taken from them, and then there were but eight founders.
 In 1785, Sinová who had been a laborer in California for several years, joined
the colony making nine heads of families, the number to whom Arguello dis-
tributed the house lots and the sowing fields in 1786. The founders left no
lasting impress on the town. Not a street in the city bears the name of any
one of them. Five of the Mexican governors have had streets named after
them, but not one of the Spanish governors of California has been so honored.
 No street or landmark bears the name of good old Felipe de Neve, the real
 founder of Los Angeles. Nor have Portola, Fages, or Bórica, men of honor
and high standing been remembered in the nomenclature of its highways.
Of the old Pueblo de Nuestra Sonora, La Reyna de Los Angeles, so carefully
 planned and so reverently named by Governor Felipe de Neve only an abbre-
 viation I of the name remains, and even the signification that that conveyed to
 the good old governor has been changed by the modern dwellers in the new
city of The Angels.

    *   There is no evidence that he ever joined the colonists at I*os Angeles.
    i Los Angeles.




                                This content downloaded from
              128.200.138.39 on Thu, 17 Sep 2026 20:44:04 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
